Copyright (C) 2002 Timo Sirainen <tss@iki.fi>

Here's my thoughts of all possible ways that I know of how to fix IRC, and
at the bottom my preffered way to fix it.

Current IRC
-----------

Good things about IRC:
 - Lots of clients, lots of users.
 - Pretty easy to use, and people are used to how it works.
 - As long as servers have good connections between each others (and they
   usually do), all users can talk to each others fine even if direct
   connection between them would be horribly slow.

Bad things:
 - Listed below :)

Netsplits
---------

The most annoying part of IRC is netsplits. Most of them today are probably
because of DDoSing, fixing that would make splits happen a lot less. But
how far should we go to fix that?

One way would be to just make the netsplits more transparent, so killing
one hub wouldn't yet kill all it's downlinks. This could be done with for
example multiple connections between servers. Would this be enough? Maybe,
but there's still not that many servers that they couldn't all be DoSed if
someone really wants to.

Another way would be to remove the reasons for DoSsing. Usually they're
used to take over some channel, get someone's nick back, as a revenge to
some server's operator, or maybe they just do it to annoy people? Services
can be used to keep nicks and channels, and that works quite well in many
networks. Though they've still been DoSed at times and sometimes for a long
time.

Hub/service hiding. Seems to work quite well I think :) If there's no way
to find them, they can't DoS them. Of course, you could still DoS the
servers separately..

Peer to peer networks with hiding everyone's real IPs. I've thought of this
many times, but it's very difficult to design one that would actually work.

Nicks
-----

There's lots of people in big IRC networks, and so there's lots of nicks.
Quite often you'll find someone else trying to use your nick as well.
There's no good reason why two people who have nothing in common, never see
each other and have no common friends couldn't use the same nick.

IRC networks
------------

There's lots of networks, some public, some private. Finding servers for
those big networks that let you in can sometimes be difficult (ircnet
especially). Big networks have more problems and are usually more slower
and difficult to get any updates done to the network. Smaller networks
usually work better, but then again there's no people either who to talk
to.

There's also lots of overlapping channels in different networks. This could
be bad because it divides the people who know about the stuff. A question
asked in one network could easily be answered by someone in another
network. However, sometimes it's good that there's multiple choices to
channels, not everyone agrees how to run a channel.

It's also a bit annoying that you can't just say "I'm xxx in IRC", you'll
also need to say the IRC network name, and that may still not be enough if
the network isn't one of the big ones. Many clients also don't handle
multiple server connections very easily and even if they do, it's still a
bit annoying to connect to some network just to talk to someone in there.

Chicken-Egg problem
-------------------

The reason why IRC enhancements haven't succeeded so far is because they
always create new networks, and the worst ones would require you to change
your client. Why go through all that trouble just to be in a small network
while everyone you really want to talk to is somewhere else? This
chicken-egg problem needs to be solved if there's ever going to be any
serious competitor to IRC.

And how to solve it? You could try to get the problems to be fixed in those
big networks. Patch ircd to support multiple connections between servers
and maybe fix some other things, and then just get most servers to run that
great new server code ... As if that could ever happen. Or maybe if you
waited for years and years.

Some gateways between old and new networks might work. You'd connect to
only the gateway, and it would transparently handle the connections to old
and new networks. But who would run the gateways? Not the users, they're
too lazy to install it. Gateway admins would need to be people who are
interested about the new network, and would also allow others to use their
servers to connect to other IRC networks - quite possibly abusing them and
getting that gateway k-lined. There goes the support for old networks.

Even with those problems, I think it might be possible to get it to work
via gateways. If there were many of them and they wouldn't let non-trusted
users connect to the older networks, they wouldn't get k-lined either. But
you'd still need to get lots of gateways and have them configured to
connect to the new network. That wouldn't be too easy either, people would
just think that they'd soon have to be reinstalling/reconfiguring anyway if
this wouldn't work, or if there was a better alternative new network or if
new versions of the gateway came out all the time or whatever..

Networks this, networks that, what if we just GET RID OF THE NETWORKS ONCE
AND FOR ALL. Do you really care who is running your network and how it's
run? Very likely not, you just want it to work. You do however want to
control your channels, and maybe filter the data that your client receives.
If everyone could run servers, everyone could be admins and control what
their clients get. If you don't like some server, go create your own.
Private messages would be sent directly to the receiver's server, for
channels there'd need to be something more complex (I already have some
ideas).

If we proved that after installing this thing's server/gateway, you'd never
need to touch it again unless you wanted new features. Everyone would be
using the same "network" because it wouldn't be possible not to do so
unless you used another protocol entirely. The protocol should be as simple
as possible and easy to add extensions so it would last for a long time. If
time comes for a new protocol, it should be easy to be made backwards
compatible with this one.

In short, make everyone love it, don't require any other action from users
than to connect to different server, and don't give any reasons why people
wouldn't want to move to the new server.

Roadmap
-------

 - Design the protocol and the core in general. Make sure people like it.
   Have some ideas about what extensions will/might come and how to make
   them.

 - Start coding the server and IRC-gateway when the protocol looks like
   it won't change much.

 - Put some test servers out, but give IRC-gateway access only to some
   trusted users. Make sure everyone knows that it isn't finished yet
   and there's no guarantees of backwards compatibility.

 - Start designing extensions, code them when finished.

 - Lock the core protocol, and start creating hype :) Try to get everyone
   to run those servers. Most server admins would give access only to
   trusted users, so they may as well enable IRC-gateway for them.

 - Now just wait for the masses to grow and keep coding the thing better
   and better, but don't require anyone to upgrade unless they want some
   new features.

 - Start coding native protocol support for clients to get rid of some
   IRC limitations and to enable new features.

 - Everyone uses irc+ protocol enabled clients, backwards compatibility
   for IRC protocol can be dropped, IRC-gateways can be dropped. IRC is
   dead, long live the irc+ ;)
